going to be to understand how to read the underlying matrices. I'm glossing over some details about some normalization steps that happen in between, but this is after all a high-level preview. After that, the process essentially repeats, you go back and forth between attention blocks and multi-layer perceptron blocks, until at the very end the hope is that all of the essential meaning of the passage has somehow been baked into the very last vector in the sequence. We then perform a certain operation on that last vector that produces a probability distribution over all possible tokens, all possible little chunks of text that might come next. And like I said, once you have a tool that predicts what comes next given a snippet of text, you can feed it a little bit of seed text and have it repeatedly play this game of predicting what comes next, sampling from the distribution, appending it, and then repeating over and over. Some of you in the know may remember how long before ChatGPT came into the scene, this is what early demos of GPT-3 looked like, you would have it autocomplete stories and essays based on an initial snippet. To make a tool like this into a chatbot, the easiest starting point is to have a little bit of text that establishes the setting of a user interacting with a helpful AI assistant, what you would call the system prompt, and then you would use the user's initial question or prompt as the first bit of dialogue, and then you have it start predicting what such a helpful AI assistant would say in response. There is more to say about an added step of training that's required to make this work well, but at a high level this is the idea. In this chapter, you and I are going to expand on the details of what happens at the very beginning of the network, at the very end of the network, and I also want to spend a lot of time reviewing some important bits of background knowledge, things that would have been second nature to any machine learning engineer by the time transformers came around. If you're comfortable with that background knowledge and a little impatient, you could probably feel free to skip to the next chapter, which is going to focus on the attention blocks, generally considered the heart of the transformer. After that, I want to talk more about these multi-layer perceptron blocks, how training works, and a number of other details that will have been skipped up to that point. For broader context, these videos are additions to a mini-series about deep learning, and it's okay if you haven't watched the previous ones, I think you can do it out of order, but before diving into transformers specifically, I do think it's worth making sure that we're on the same page about the basic premise and structure of deep learning. At the risk of stating the obvious, this is one approach to machine learning, which describes any model where you're using data to somehow determine how a model behaves. What I mean by that is, let's say you want a function that takes in an image and it produces a label describing it, or our example of predicting the next word given a passage of text, or any other task that seems to require some element of intuition and pattern recognition. We almost take this for granted these days, but the idea with machine learning is that rather than trying to explicitly define a procedure for how to do that task in code, which is what people would have done in the earliest days of AI, instead you set up a very flexible structure with tunable parameters, like a bunch of knobs and dials, and then, somehow, you use many examples of what the output should look like for a given input to tweak and tune the values of those parameters to mimic this behavior. For example, maybe the simplest form of machine learning is linear regression, where your inputs and outputs are each single numbers, something like the square footage of a house and its price, and what you want is to find a line of best fit through this data, you know, to predict future house prices. That line is described by two continuous parameters, say the slope and the y-intercept, and the goal of linear regression is to determine those parameters to closely match the data. Needless to say, deep learning models get much more complicated. GPT-3, for example, has not two, but 175 billion parameters. But here's the thing, it's not a given that you can create some giant model with a huge number of parameters without it either grossly overfitting the training data or being completely intractable to train. Deep learning describes a class of models that in the last couple decades have proven to scale remarkably well. What unifies them is that they all use the same training algorithm, it's called backpropagation, we talked about it in previous chapters, and the context that I want you to have as we go in is that in order for this training algorithm to work well at scale, these models have to follow a certain specific format. And if you know this format going in, it helps to explain many of the choices for how a transformer processes language, which otherwise run the risk of feeling kinda arbitrary. First, whatever kind of model you're making, the input has to be formatted as an array of real numbers. This could simply mean a list of numbers, it could be a two-dimensional array, or very often you deal with higher dimensional arrays, where the general term used is tensor. You often think of that input data as being progressively transformed into many distinct layers, where again, each layer is always structured as some kind of array of real numbers, until you get to a final layer which you consider the output. For example, the final layer in our text processing model is a list of numbers representing the probability distribution for all possible next tokens. In deep learning, these model parameters are almost always referred to as weights, and this is because a key feature of these models is that the only way these parameters interact with the data being processed is through weighted sums. You also sprinkle some non-linear functions throughout, but they won't depend on parameters. Typically, though, instead of seeing the weighted sums all naked and written out explicitly like this, you'll instead find them packaged together as various components in a matrix vector product. It amounts to saying the same thing, if you think back to how matrix vector multiplication works, each component in the output looks like a weighted sum. It's just often conceptually cleaner for you and me to think about matrices that are filled with tunable parameters that transform vectors that are drawn from the data being processed. For example, those 175 billion weights in GPT-3 are organized into just under 28,000 distinct matrices. Those matrices in turn fall into eight different categories, and what you and I are going to do is step through each one of those categories to understand what that type does. As we go through, I think it's kind of fun to reference the specific numbers from GPT-3 to count up exactly where those 175 billion come from. Even if nowadays there are bigger and better models, this one has a certain charm as the first large-language model to really capture the world's attention outside of ML communities. Also, practically speaking, companies tend to keep much tighter lips around the specific numbers for more modern networks. I just want to set the scene going in, that as you peek under the hood to see what happens inside a tool like ChatGPT, almost all of the actual computation looks like matrix vector multiplication. There's a little bit of a risk getting lost in the sea of billions of numbers, but you should draw a very sharp distinction in your mind between the weights of the model, which I'll always color in blue or red, and the data being processed, which I'll always color in gray. The weights are the actual brains, they are the things learned during training, and they determine how it behaves. The data being processed simply encodes whatever specific input is fed into the model for a given run, like an example snippet of text. With all of that as foundation, let's dig into the first step of this text processing example, which is to break up the input into little chunks and turn those chunks into vectors. I mentioned how those chunks are called tokens, which might be pieces of words or punctuation, but every now and then in this chapter and especially in the next one, I'd like to just pretend that it's broken more cleanly into words. Because we humans think in words, this will just make it much easier to reference little examples and clarify each step. The model has a predefined vocabulary, some list of all possible words, say 50,000 of them, and the first matrix that we'll encounter, known as the embedding matrix, has a single column for each one of these words. These columns are what determines what vector each word turns into in that first step. We label it W_E, and like all the matrices we see, its values begin random, but they're going to be learned based on data. Turning words into vectors was common practice in machine learning long before transformers, but it's a little weird if you've never seen it before, and it sets the foundation for everything that follows, so let's take a moment to get familiar with it. We often call this embedding a word, which invites you to think of these vectors very geometrically as points in some high dimensional space. Visualizing a list of three numbers as coordinates for points in 3D space would be no problem, but word embeddings tend to be much much higher dimensional. In GPT-3 they have 12,288 dimensions, and as you'll see, it matters to work in a space that has a lot of distinct directions. In the same way that you could take a two-dimensional slice through a 3D space and project all the points onto that slice, for the sake of animating word embeddings that a simple model is giving me, I'm going to do an analogous thing by choosing a three-dimensional slice through this very high dimensional space, and projecting the word vectors down onto that and displaying the results. The big idea here is that as a model tweaks and tunes its weights to determine how exactly words get embedded as vectors during training, it tends to settle on a set of embeddings where directions in the space have a kind of semantic meaning. For the simple word-to-vector model I'm running here, if I run a search for all the words whose embeddings are closest to that of tower, you'll notice how they all seem to give very similar tower-ish vibes. And if you want to pull up some Python and play along at home, this is the specific model that I'm using to make the animations. It's not a transformer, but it's enough to illustrate the idea that directions in the space can carry semantic meaning. A very classic example of this is how if you take the difference between
